While taking health insurance, companies
make big promises.  There are fancy taglines.  The
agents talk very politely.  That
means everything runs very smoothly.
But their real test comes when
a policy holder gets admitted to the hospital for treatment.
Then you will know which
health insurance company actually
stands with you and which company makes excuses.
So far, we have reviewed the claims data of the top 10 health
insurance companies in India.
This is the
data for the first quarter of 2025.  But now the question
arises that
which is the best health insurance company among these companies?
Who can you trust in case of claims
?  And listen, some big names like
SBI General, Manipal Cigna, Oriental
Insurance, National Insurance, their
claims data has not been released separately.
But you don't worry.
Their claims data is also included in today's comparison video.
In today's video, we will review the
health claims data of India's top 13 insurance companies.
That too
on five very important parameters.  The first
parameter we will check is the claims paid
ratio.  That is, when the policy holders
asked for claims, which company approved the maximum amount
and here
you will get to see some shocking data.  The second data we
will check is the solvency margin.  Does your
health insurance company have enough
liquid funds to comfortably settle a large
or very large claim?
This
will tell us the solvency margin.  The third
data will be of the incurred claim ratio.  Is
your health insurance company
interested only in collecting premiums
or is it also paying claims?  This ICR
will clarify us.  Fourth, we
will look at the data of complaints.  That is,
how many complaints are
filed with which company for every 10,000 health claims.  That is, which
health insurance company's policy holders are the
most frustrated and angry.
Here also you are going to know some shocking things.
And the fifth and last metric will be the
claim settlement ratio.  Which company has the
best claim settlement speed and efficiency?  The best
and easiest way to check this is to
check the claim settlement ratio of the companies.  And friends, this
video is not just a comparison video.
This is the
most realistic and data-driven analysis of the insurance impact channel to date.
Because when it comes to the
health of our family, decisions should be taken on the
basis of evidence and data, not on guesswork and emotions.
So stay tuned to this video
because by the end you will know
which health insurance company
deserves your trust and money and which ones you should stay away from.
Let's quickly start this video.
Claim Speed ​​Ratio will tell us how much money the companies gave to the policy holders out of ₹100 when the
policy holders asked for a claim.
And it is not that
₹100 was asked for.  Out of that, I gave ₹81, 86, ₹90.
This means that the entire claim may be rejected if the
company has not paid the amount demanded in the claim.
That is, the company refused to pay ₹100 out of 100
and paid
₹100 out of 100 in the remaining claims, then that average
is calculated and then it comes out as
claims paid ratio and from this ratio we will
try to understand that for whatever amount the policy holders are
filing claims with the company,
how much money out of ₹100 the
companies are paying.  So the first company that
comes to our mind is Neevapa.  NVPA has a
claims paid ratio of 81%.  That means,
when a claim of ₹100 was asked from the company, the
company paid ₹81 out of it.  Now let us
look at the data of all the companies once.  After that
I will tell you
what is the average of this claims paid ratio of all these companies
and which companies have very good ratio.  Star
Health paid ₹86 instead of ₹100.  Care
Health Insurance is offering ₹89 and ICICI
LBRD brand is very good but this
amount is very less but out of ₹100 only
₹79 claims were approved by ICICI LBARD.
Aditya Birla 81 HDFC ago 90% claim of ₹100 was
sought, out of which ₹90 was
approved by HDFC ago.  After this comes the turn of
Manipal Signa, which is giving only ₹67.
Now the plans sound very good
but what really matters is
how much money the company is giving.
Manipal Signa paid only ₹67 when asked for ₹100.
This is the data for the first quarter of 2025.  Bajaj is
giving ₹90.  Tata AIG is paying ₹85
on ₹100 of claimed amount.  SBI General has a
claims paid ratio of ₹81%.  Oriental
Insurance.  Now comes the turn of government companies.
See this also.
Oriental Insurance paid ₹97 when asked for ₹100.
New India has a claims paid ratio of 86%
and National Insurance Company has paid ₹90 for every
₹100 claimed under health claims.
So it
is obvious who has the highest claims paid ratio
?  It belongs to Oriental Insurance.  Now, it will be
considered that the company which
pays the most money is very good.
But what do we do here?  Let us calculate their
average and find out what is the average claims
paid ratio of these 13 companies
?  So the amount that comes out
is 84.7 i.e. 85% which is the average of the clew
speed ratio.  That means if we take the average of all the companies, then out of
100 companies, ₹85 are
paying.  But we need the best
health insurance company that
pays the highest amount.  So we will see
which companies are paying above the average here.
Now friends, we have come to those companies
whose claims paid ratio is above
average.
They are giving more claims than the industry average which is more than 85.
I have marked which companies
in green.  The claim speed ratio of Star Health
Insurance, Ciry Health, HDFC Ago, Bajaj
Ali, Oriental Insurance, New India and
National Insurance, all three government companies,
is above average.  And
Oriental has 97%.  One company
missing here is United India because their
claims data is missing from their website itself.  The
NL form of claims data, which is a
public disclosure, was
not available online.  So that's why
we have excluded it from the data.   The
remaining three companies are visible to you here.
Four names have come up from the private sector.  Star Health, Care
Health.  These are standalone companies and HDFC
and Go and Bajaj are the general insurance companies
which are giving the highest amount of money to their policy holders in terms of claims
out of the total claimed amount.
Next stat comes friends, solvency
ratio.  So the solvency ratio tells
how much liquid funds are available with the company.
Companies have a lot of money, but the
solvency ratio will tell us how much liquidity they have to pay claims, the funds they keep, the money they can use immediately.  The
guidelines of IRDA
say that if insurance companies have to pay a sum of ₹100 to the insured policy
holders,
then they should have at least ₹150 at all times
and this makes the solvency ratio
1.5 but Neema Bupa has 2.86,
instead of a liability of ₹100, they have ₹286.
We can understand this.  Star Health has a
slightly
lower solvency ratio of 2.22 than Care Health.  It is 1.6 for ICICI LBRD and
2.7 for general insurance. This is
their overall solvency ratio. Aditya Birla's
is 1.85. Apart from this, the solvency margin of HDFC Ago is also
more than two.
Manipal Signa has 1.91 and what is this, Bajaj has more
than three.  For every ₹100 of
liability, they have ₹334 available.  That
means it is quite sufficient.
When the numbers of government companies came, Oriental
Insurance was in minus, in negative.
That means if they have to pay ₹100, then
they have a negative balance of ₹100.  It is already
in loss.  However, their earnings
come from investment.  From there they
can make the claim.  But currently the
liquid funds are in negative.
Because what is the claims paid ratio?  97% of them are
paying the money.  New India
Insurance is the only government company with a
positive solvency margin of
1.87 and is also the only company
listed on the stock exchange.  That means it has these
funds.  National's solvency
margin is also negative at 0.72, meaning it does
not have enough money to pay claims for the amount of policies it has issued.  Now friends, let us calculate the
average of these solvency margins so that
after calculating the average of all, we
can compare which companies have
solvency margins above the average.  So the average comes out to be
1.75.  If we take the average of the data of all the companies, then the
company whose solvency margin is above 1.75 is above
average.  We will consider it good here, we will
consider it stable.  So friends, if we talk about
solvency margin, then the
solvency margin of most of the companies is above average.  Only
Care Health Insurance
is above the benchmark of 1.5 but
it is lower than the industry average of 1.75.  And there are two government companies.  There
are public sector units.  The solvency margin of Oriental
Insurance and National Insurance is
negative.   That's why
I have marked them red.
Similarly, Manipal Cigna's claim speed
ratio is quite low.  So I have red
marked that one.  That means this is
not acceptable at all.
Which company has the highest solvency margin?
Of Bajaj General Insurance.  Apart from that, Star
Health Insurance also has 2.2.  Nevapa
also has 2.86.  HDFC Ago also has a solvency margin of more than two.
And SBI General
also has a solvency margin of more than two.
So all these companies are acceptable above average.
But
you can consider those who have more than two as the best.   In
which NIVPA, Star Health
Insurance, ICICI LBD, HDFC Ago along with
Bajaj, SBI General also come.  These are
companies which
you can say have very good solvency margin.   The
next data comes friends, the incurred claim
ratio, that is,
which company is
giving the maximum claims in return for the money it is taking from you?  Nima BPA has an Incurred
Claim Ratio of 80%.  However, I
say this again and again that an incurred claim ratio between 60 to 80
is satisfactory.
The closer it is to 80, the
better it is for the policy holders.  The closer he
is to 60, the better he is for the company.
Neema Bhupa has an 80% incurred claim
ratio.  We will also calculate the average of all these.
After that we will see who has a very good
incurred claim ratio.  Star Health
70% Care Health Insurance 77% ICIC
LBRD 81% Understand it like this that when ₹100
premium came and they sold their policy, out of that
₹81 was paid by ICIC LBARD as claims, then it comes out to be
Incurred Claim
Ratio Aitya Birla 80% HDFC ARGO
93% This is very good in terms of pole shoulders
but somewhere it can
affect the profitability of the company.
Therefore, this can also be considered negative.
Manipal Cigna 87% Bajaj Ali 83%
Tata AIG 74% SBI General 83% Oriental
Insurance 88% And New India did
wonders, 109%, that is, when the
premium came for ₹100, they gave claims of ₹19.
If National Insurance
premium comes for ₹100, then ₹110 is paid as claim.
So if these were not government companies, then
perhaps these companies would not have been able to survive for long
because maintaining the incurred claim ratio is
very
important for sustainability and for the company to survive.  Only then this business can
remain profitable.  But since they are government companies, it does
not make much difference.
Loss making may also occur.  There is
support and backup from the government.  So this is their
incurred claim ratio.  Now the average that I have calculated for them is
85.7%.
Now this average number of 85
can increase significantly due to government companies.  But the ideal
Incident Claim Ratio, which would be considered very good, from the
policy holder's
perspective, we will assume it to be between
70 to 85, that is, Incident Claim Ratio between 70 to 85
is a perfect balance that the
company is also not incurring any loss.  This means that
it is giving a decent claim in return for the premium
and it is also
very good for the policy holders.  The Unresolved Claim Ratio of NIVAPA
is 80%, so this is also within this range.
Star Health has 70%.  CARE has 77%, ICICI
LBAD has 81%, Aitya Birla has 80%, HDFC has
93%.  This is somehow harmful for the company.
So the incurred claim ratio is
not green here.  Manipal
Singhana's is also more than 85, so we have
kept it in negative.  Bajaj has 83%.
Although this is more than 80,
it will still be considered a good incurred claim ratio.
Tata owns 74% of AIG.  SBI General has
83%.  Oriental has more than 85.  And
New India and National have more than 100.  That
means overall it
is harmful for the company.  The companies that we have listed in these green columns have an
incurred claim ratio
that is excellent for the policy holders
and is not a loss-making ratio for the company.   The
next data comes from friends about complaints.
We will also be surprised to see which company has the most complaints.
If we talk about Neevapa, there are 32 complaints.  But out of
10,000 claims
received for health insurance, there are 32 complaints.  You will be
shocked to see Star Health Insurance.  There are
62 complaints but 10,000
claims.  We will also calculate the average of all these and
see which company has the most
complaints.
Complaints are also not less in Care Health Insurance.  There
are 56 complaints for every 10,000 claims.  ICICI LBRD
is a general insurance company.  There
is a star here.  I will tell you the reason for this.
Because it is a general insurance company.  So
we have estimated the data of health insurance complaints.
How is that applied?  We have calculated the ratio of all the
health insurance claims filed
in a general insurance company.
How many of the total claims are health insurance claims?
We have received double the number of complaints than the percentage that came out so that we can
calculate the worst case scenario.
We can estimate as many complaints as possible.
So here approximately 24 complaints have come out.
Related to health insurance of ICICI LBA.  Aditya Birla has only 13
complaints.  HDFC Ergo is one of the best
insurance companies in terms of service.   There are
only eight complaints for every 10,000 claims.
This is the reason.  Manipal Singhana has 39
complaints for every 10,000 complaints.
Bajaj has done a great job brother.  There are only five
complaints but 10,000 claims.  Now this is the
reason why data gives us a completely
realistic picture.  This is data from all over
India.  This is the data for the first quarter of 2025.
And these complaints are not something
anyone is guessing.  This is registered online.
This is actual data.  The
complaints we have calculated at Tata AIG may have been
related to health insurance.
That's the worst case scenario of 23 complaints
but 10,000 claims.  There must have been 12 complaints in SBI General.
We have done this calculation.
Only four complaints in Oriental
because claims paid ratio is 97% and incurred
claims ratio is 88% so complaints are the least.
In New India also the claims paid
ratio is 86%.  Solvency is much better.   There
are only five complaints for every 10,000
claims and the
claim paid ratio under National Insurance is 90%.  The incurred claim
ratio is also 110%.  Still there are 49 complaints.
So what do we understand by this?  This
means that there is some
problem in the claim process of hearing the customers.
This is what the complaints data tells us.
If we take the average of complaints of all these companies,
it comes out to be
approximately 22 complaints, which is the
industry average.
In most companies, it is well above 22.
Below 10 complaints:
We will consider the company against which the complaints are made as a good company.  That
means she takes care of the policy holders.
Their claim process
is smooth and there is no confusion in between
which may cause the policy holders to complain.
So here are the companies with the
fewest complaints.  The first is Oriental and the
second is New India.  Bajaj
is at the top among private players.  After that, there
are very few complaints against HDFCO also.  It
is less than 10.  I have additionally included two companies here
which can be considered good companies.
He is Aitya B Birla.  There are only 13 complaints.
Apart from this, SBI General also has only
12 complaints which we have calculated.   This
estimate has been made on the basis of their health claims data.  But there are two companies that have the
most complaints.  Star Health
Insurance has 62 complaints.  There
are 62 complaints but 10,000 claims and Care
Health Insurance has 56 complaints.
This means that policy holders were
not told things clearly either.
Policy holders don't know.  That's why
they are complaining if the company is doing well.
Or they are not being heard.   The
company is doing something wrong.  These complaints have
no further meaning.  These complaints are a kind
of feedback that tells the company that
you are wrong here.  Improve this method,
improve this system.  So these complaints
indicate these things.  And more
complaints mean less efficiency within the claims process.  That
means lack of clarity.
Because whenever any dispute arises
between two parties, it happens only
when there is no clarity in the coverage of terms and conditions.  That is why
people complain
and through those complaints they
want to tell that something wrong has happened to them.
Now friends, only the last data has come, let us
review it.  This is the claim
settlement ratio.  Claim settlement ratio
tells
how many claims the company settled out of every 100 claims filed.
Claim Settlement Ratio basically
tells us the intention of the company, its intention
, its efficiency, that is,
how much the company is interested
in settling the claims.  The higher the claim
settlement ratio, the more it
cares about the policy holders.  We are equally
interested in giving them money and
settling their claims.  Neema Bupa has a
claim settlement ratio of 94%.  Of the 100
claims filed in April, May and June
2025, Nevapa settled 94 claims.
Star Health Insurance 90%
Care Health Insurance 96% ICICI LBARD
84% This is quite low.  Aditya Birla 96%,
HDFC Argo 97% claims were settled, only 3%
of the claims have not been settled.
Manipal Singhana 95% Bajaj Ali 96% Tata
AIG 84% This is very low.
What is inside SBI General that claims data is not
available.  When we looked at the data of SBI General, there was a
zero written under the reputed claims under rejected claims.
Due to this, we could not calculate their actual claim
settlement ratio
because if we assume it to be zero, then the
company was settling 99.7% of the claims.
So we left it blank because
this would not be the correct data to mention here.
Oriental's claim settlement ratio is
93% with 100 claims filed.  Out of that, 93
claims were approved by the company.  In New India,
98% claims were approved and
in National, 93%. If we take the average of these, then the average
comes to 93%, that is, the claim
settlement ratio of 93% is the average of all these
companies, but we consider the
company whose claim settlement ratio will be 95 or above
because we have to find out the best and not the
average, so we will
consider the best company which has a
claim settlement ratio of more than 95.  Let us see
which companies are able to get their names registered in this list.
So friends, here
in the claim settlement ratio, Nevapa is
not in this list.  Star Health is also
not in this list.  The first name that comes to mind is
Care Health Insurance, which has a
claim settlement ratio of more than 95.  ICICI LBARAD
surprised me a bit because it
is a good brand.  It is a good company.  The plan
is very good.  But the claims paid ratio is also low
and the claim settlement ratio is also very low.
Complaints are also above average.  Aditya
Birla is settling 96% of the claims.
Apart from this, HDFC Air has a very good
claim settlement ratio of 97%, Manipal Cigna has 95%
but the rest of the metrics are not so good. Manipal
Cigna has a claim settlement of 96%, Bajaj Ali has 96%,
Tata AIG has 84%, not so good,
SBI General does not have data.  Oriental
Insurance has slightly lower claim settlement rates.
Claims are being settled properly in New India.
National also has a claim settlement
ratio below 95.  However, this
is equal to the average of 93.  Now friends,
if I look at the complete data here, I see
that the claim speed ratio of Neva Bupa is
a little low and the complaints are very high.   The
claim settlement ratio of Star Health Insurance,
which should be good, is
not that good.  It is 90%.  There is scope for improvement in this.
62 complaints is very
disappointing.  that is not good.
Star should pay maximum attention
to hearing its policy holders,
on the claim process, where are the loop holes,
where are the shortcomings, what are the reasons for the complaints
and work on them because nothing is
hidden these days.
Your business will grow only if your customer is satisfied.
All the data is fine inside Care Health Insurance also.  The only
problem is complaints.  I have already discussed ICIC LBA.  The
brand is very good but the
claims paid ratio, complaints and claim
settlement ratio does
not match any of the top companies.  Aditya Birla's
claims paid ratio is slightly lower.
Apart from this, the solvency margin, incurred claim
ratio, complaints are very low and claim
settlement is also very good.  All the data of HDFCO is also
very good.  There is only the incurred
claims ratio.  However, this is also
not a bad thing for the policy holders.
But insurance companies are also
part of this ecosystem.  So it is not that we should only
think about our own benefits.  The company is also incurring losses.  So that's why
we have not considered it a good factor.
Manipal Singhana's claims
paid ratio was shocking.  The company is paying ₹67 out of 100.
Claims paid
ratio and solvency margin are good.  The incurred
claim ratio is decent.  There
are too many complaints.  Claim settlement is also fine.
Today's comparison video on Bajaj Allianz One of the Top Insurance Companies.  90%
Claims Paid Ratio Best in the Industry
Best Solvency Margin
Incident Claim Ratio Excellent.  One of the
lowest number of complaints in the industry
and a claim settlement ratio of 96%.  All the
data is amazing.  The
claimed speed ratio of Tata IG is 85%, which is
considered average.  The solvency ratio is good.   The
incurred claims ratio is decent at 74.  There
are 23 complaints.  This is also a bit much.  The
average claim settlement
ratio is 84%.  Every company should have at least 90 plus.  Only
then will we consider him good company.
Apart from this, the
claims paid ratio of SBI General is 81%.  It is very less.   The
solvency margin is very good.  The incurred
claims ratio is very good.  Complaints
are also fine.  I would not consider 12 complaints to be a lot
and
we do not have the data on claim settlement ratio.  Now comes the turn of
government companies.  So the best company
among these is New India Insurance which
we come to know according to the data.
One of the issues with Oriental Insurance is solvency.  The
claim settlement ratio is
not bad but is less than New India.
So if you want the smoothest claim
approval, New India wants the most satisfied
customer.  If I talk about government companies,
New India
is the only listed company which has a decent solvency margin and its
claims paid ratio is also 86%.  Overall, the
data appears to be fine here.
But there is only one problem with government companies.
Pending claims take a lot of time.
You will have to be patient and wait.
Sometimes it may take time for the reimbursement claim
to come or for the money to be received
because the working process is slow.
But the money is real.  This claims data
shows that you will definitely get the money.  Now
friends, it is time to know
which are the top three health insurance companies.
First of all, if we talk about private sector companies, then
obviously the first name that comes to mind is
Bajaj.  It was
fun to see such amazing data.  And the second thing is the
disclaimer is that this is not my choice.
This data shows how each company is
performing all over India.  The second
name that comes is HDFC Ago.  You know the
premium is a bit expensive but
all the data is great.  The most important thing is
that the customers are happy.  There is no complaint.
He is not worried even after giving the money.  The
third name I would like to take is Aditya
Birla in which the claim speed ratio is a little
low.  Apart from this, all the rest of the data
is excellent.  And here I am giving maximum weightage to
claim settlement and number
of complaints.  Brother, the policy holder should
be happy.  If the policy holder is happy then
all the data and all the metrics come into it.
I would also mention Care Health Insurance,
if the complaints here were very less, then the
industry average of these companies is
almost three times that of 22 complaints.
Same is the case with Star Health Insurance.
Rest of the data of these companies is very good.
But they
should pay attention to their customer service.  Nima Bupa could also have been included
in this list if the complaints were slightly
less and the claim speed ratio could
also have been improved a little.  But after Aditya Birla,
if there was a fourth company I
could name, it would be Nevapa, which is
performing very well in this list as per the data.  There
is only problem of complaints inside Star and Care.  The companies are fine, by the way.  We
can work on these.  But what
interested me the most was ICICI LBRD,
whose name did not appear in this list.
Their claims paid ratio is very low.
Complaints are also quite high.  The claim
settlement ratio is 84%.  One of the
lowest in the list is
Tata AIG and ICICI LBRD.  This
is quite low.  That's why the data from this company
shocked me so much.  Manipal Sinha also has a
very low claims paid ratio.  It
is one of the lowest and there are a lot of complaints.
That's why it could not make its name in this list.  The
data of Tata AIG is also
average.  It is satisfactory.  But
we cannot call it one of the best companies.
But in government companies, if you
are ready to take policies with submission then you can
go with New India and Oriental.  There
are two very wonderful companies.
Although Oriental's solvency margin
is low, policy holders are still quite happy.  The
claim settlement ratio is good and the
claims paid ratio is one of the best.
Friends, if we take the essence of this entire
comparison, then in the private sector,
Bajaj Allians, HDFC Ago and Aitya Birla and at
number four, you can also say Nivpa.  These are the
companies which are performing very well
in terms of claims.
If we talk about the first quarter of 2025, then if we
talk about government companies, then New
India and Oriental can be your choice.
But if you can tolerate the sub-limit in your policy
and it takes
some time for your claim to be received and settled and
you do not have any problem with it, then you
can also take a policy from a government company.  But
we have also come to know this.  Of course the company is
in loss.  The real money is being
given by government companies.  It also shows the claims paid ratio.  It
also tells the claim settlement ratio.
But the solvency margin is
indicating that the situation is tight.  Companies do
not have much liquid funds.  So
you can take the policy.  It is a government back company.   There
is no problem.  And within the private health
insurance companies, I have
told you that these are the top three-four players who are
currently performing well.  Now
I would like to give you a disclaimer.
If you have a policy with other companies, is there anything to be
disappointed about?  No.
You can view this data in this way.
Suppose there are 40 children in a class.  Here I am
comparing which child is getting first, second and
third rank.  Are the
other children not performing well
?  It's not like that.
How many marks can someone get in a subject?  You may be
very good in some subject.  Someone may be a
little weak and
he may improve in the coming time.  So
this is what we learned from this data also.
Which companies performed best this quarter?
This
data may also change in the coming quarters.  This data may
also be slightly different.  If a company makes improvements, the
complaints against that company may reduce.
Claim settlement ratios may improve
and their solvency margins may also improve.
If you
enjoyed this series on reviewing claims data,
please let me know by commenting and if I
share my experience, I
learned a lot.  My perception about many companies
, what
I knew from hearsay or what
I understood from my limited experience, totally
changed.  The data told us that brand
may matter but claim settlement matters.  The
company which is doing good claim settlement is the
better company.  If you want
that when all the four quarters of the entire financial year 2025-26 are
completed, then we should
bring a similar detailed series on how each company has performed in this entire year, then do
tell me that also by commenting
because your opinion on Insurance Impact channel
matters a lot to me.  So
please do let us know by commenting.  Friends, you will
not believe that it took
me a lot of time
and hard work to analyze and compile this data.  But I wanted to
give you my opinion about the companies with complete clarity and transparency.  Because whenever you asked me to
tell you the best insurance company,
if I just told you the name of a company based on my guess, then
that would not be the correct answer.
Therefore, I have thoroughly reviewed the data of the first quarter
and after that, I have presented the
performance of every company transparently before you.  If you want
that my hard work and time can be fully
utilized, full benefit can be taken out of it, then at
least share this comparison, this conclusion
video with as many people as possible
so that transparency and actual
data can reach as many people as possible
and that will be the real result of our and your hard work.
I am Harvinder Singh.  I will meet
you in the next video.  Till then take
care of yourself, stay happy and stay healthy.